
# Version Control System 

Imagine you're working on a group project. Each person is making edits to the same file at the same time. Without a system to track changes, it’s easy to overwrite someone else’s work or lose important updates.

A Version Control System (VCS) solves this problem by keeping track of every change, who made it, and when. It allows multiple people to work on the same project without conflicts and ensures that no work is lost.


### What is a VCS

A **Version Control System (VCS)** can be seen as a tool that helps track changes made to files over time. It enables:

- **Collaboration**: Multiple developers can work on the same project simultaneously.
- **Version History**: All changes are saved, allowing you to restore previous versions if needed.
- **Code Management**: Manage project updates efficiently, ensuring no work is lost or overwritten.

### Types of VCS

**1. Centralized Version Control System (CVCS)**

- A **Centralized VCS** stores all project files and version history on a **single central server**.  
- Developers must **connect to the central server** to get the latest version of the project or upload their changes.  
- If the central server is unavailable (e.g., due to a crash or downtime), no one can work or access the project.  

Think of a **library with only one copy of a book**. If someone is using it, others must wait until it’s returned to access it.


**2. Distributed Version Control System (DVCS)**

- A **Distributed VCS** gives every developer a **complete copy** of the project, including its entire history, on their local machine.  
- Developers can work **independently and offline**, only connecting to the central repository when they need to share or sync changes.  

Think of a **library with multiple copies of the same book**. Everyone can borrow their own copy, make notes, and later sync their updates with others.
>[!NOTE]
> The most widely used example of a distributed version control system (DVCS) is **Git**.
## Git

**Git** is designed as a distributed version control system because it tracks changes to your code or project files. It allows multiple developers to collaborate efficiently while keeping a detailed history of all changes.

### Why Use Git?
- **Tracks Changes**: Keeps a record of every change made to files.  
- **Collaboration**: Allows multiple people to work on the same project simultaneously.  
- **Branching and Merging**: Developers can work on different features or fixes independently and merge them later.  
- **Error Recovery**: Easily revert to earlier versions if something goes wrong.  



### Popular Git Platforms
Git has several platforms that can host projects (repositories), enabling developers to collaborate on projects and synchronize their changes, the most popular platforms are:

1. GitHub: Widely used for open-source, personal, and team projects, with excellent collaboration tools.  
2. GitLab: Offers built-in Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) tools and is popular for self-hosted repositories.  
3. Bitbucket: Often used by organizations, supports both Git and Mercurial, and integrates well with other Atlassian tools.


### Git Key Concepts
* `Repository (Repo)`:
  A folder where Git tracks all your project files and changes. You can create a Git repository for any project. It can be local (on your computer) or remote (on platforms like GitHub).

  Think of it as a folder that Git uses to manage your project and its version history.

* `Commit`: A snapshot of your changes in the repository. It saves the state of your project at a specific point in time. Each commit has a unique ID and includes a message describing the changes made.
  
  Think of it as a "save point" in your project that you can go back to if needed.

* `Branch`: A branch is a separate line of work within a repository. It allows you to work on new features or fixes without affecting the main project (e.g., the main or master branch).
 You can create multiple branches to work on different tasks.
 
  Think of it as a parallel version of your project.

* `Merge`: Merging is the process of combining changes from one branch into another. For example, you can merge a feature branch into the main branch after the feature is complete.

  Think of it as a way to bring all changes together into one final version.

### Install Git on your computer
To install Git on your system, please download it from the official website [git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/).
- Verify the installation:
 ```bash
     git --version
 ```

>[!NOTE]
>For macOS users, git is automatically installed when you install the macOS developer tools. You can check if git is already on your machine by running `git --version` or `git -v`.
